The core agent loop (also known as the agentic loop) is the iterative architecture that allows an AI to move beyond simple "one-shot" text generation to performing multi-step tasks autonomously. 

At its most basic level, it can be represented by a simple while loop:  

while task_not_complete:
    # 1. PERCEIVE: Get input (user message, previous tool output, or error)
    # 2. REASON: LLM decides what to do next based on the task and context
    # 3. ACT: Execute a tool call (API request, file edit, search, etc.)
    # 4. OBSERVE: Examine the result of the action
    # 5. REPEAT: Feed result back into context and start again

Key Stages of the Loop
Modern agent architectures, such as those used by or typically follow these specific stages: 

Perceive: The agent gathers information from its environment, including user prompts, existing code, or API responses.

Reason/Think: The LLM processes the gathered context to derive intent and determine the most logical next step.

Plan: For complex objectives, the agent breaks the task into smaller sub-tasks before proceeding.

Act: The agent performs a specific action using Tools (e.g., searching a database, running a terminal command, or writing code).

Observe/Validate: The agent reviews the outcome of its action (e.g., checking if a test passed or a file was updated) to see if it worked as intended.

Evaluate/Decision: Based on the observation, the agent decides whether to continue iterating or stop because the goal is met. 

Core Components
An agent requires three primary pieces of "infrastructure" to run this loop effectively:  

Reasoning Engine (The "Brain"): Typically an advanced LLM that can handle complex instructions and tool selection.
Tools (The "Hands"): External APIs, functions, or databases that allow the agent to interact with the world.
Memory (The "Context"): Keeps track of conversation history and previous actions so the agent can learn from its own loop. 

Why the Loop Matters: 

Unlike a standard chatbot that provides a single answer, an agent in a loop can self-correct. If a command fails or code has a bug, the "Observe" stage catches the error, and the "Reason" stage plans a fix in the next iteration. This systematic iteration is the backbone of autonomous software like Devin AI and Claude Code. 


